___
#### Segmental phonology (*chapter 10 of The Framework Of English book*)

***Phonetics*** is the ***classification*** and study of ***individual sounds***.
Still, some phonology concepts are introduced while studiying phonology:
1) ***phonology*** deals with the ***distribuition*** of the ***sound*** in a ***language*** as a ***system***
2) ***phonemes*** are ***abstract representations*** of sounds as they occur in the system of a language
3) individual ***variation*** in pronunciation (*surface realisations*) of a single phoneme are called ***allophones***.

Segmental phonology so studies individual sound (phonemes) or segments and their distribution (syllable level).
Suprasegmental (pitch and intonation, at syllable level and beyond).

Phonology also looks at: 
- where sound can occur in words
- which sounds they can combine with
- what happens when certain sounds occur in connected speech before or after other sounds

No english word can end with glottal fricative sound. 
(*table of distribution of english consonants in RP at page 255 and 259 of The Frameworks Of English*)

___
#### The distribution of consonants

Single consonants can occur as:
- word initials
- word medials
- word finals
Most of consonants can occur in all of them but there are some special cases:
- voiced palato-alveolar fricative */ʒ/*
	- it occurs word-initially in French loanwords
	- it can occur in word medial-position
	- it occurs word-finally in French loanwords
- glottal fricative */h/*
	- common at the beginning of words
	- rarer word medially
	- it does not occur word-finally
- nasals */m/ /ɱ/ /n/ /ŋ/ /ɲ/ /ɳ/*
	- */m/* and */n/* occur in all three positions
	- */ŋ/* *velar nasal* occurs word-final and medially, but never initial
- approximants */j/ /w/ /r/ /l/*
	- limited distribution in single ocnsonant occurrence but very productive in ***clusters*** (combinations of consonants)
	- they all occur initially
- /r/ does not occur in word final position in RP but it does in other varieties.

Monosyllabic words are always stressed, so *ə* can never occur in monosyllabic words. (but it does occur in monosyllabic words when pronounced in connected speech).
A syllable is called ***open*** when it ends with a vowel.
Short monophthongs never occur in open syllables.
Long monophthongs can occur in all three positions.
In monosyllabic words the structure can be VC, CV, CVC.
/ʊ/ does not occur in closed monosyllables.
Pronunciation of words, and stress, may vary on connected speech. (for example <*of*> can be pronounced /ɑv/ but also /əv/).
The sentence stress is on the words of the sentence which carry meanings (nouns and verbs)
Closing diphthongs occur in all three positions.
Centering diphtongs occur only in middle and end of syllable. (CVC, CV)

___
#### Syllables

Every syllable must have a vowel.
A single vowel can be a word.
No single consonant can be a word.
If a word has more than one vowel then it is disyllabic.

***Phonotactics*** is the ***way*** phonemes group together to ***form syllables***.
***Phonemes group*** together according to a ***pattern*** or ***syllable template***.
The ***central*** element of a syllable is a ***vowel***, so it can be ***both preceeded*** and ***followed by consonants***.
A ***combination of consonants***, as already mentioned, is called ***cluster***.
The ***maximum number*** of ***consonants*** in ***syllable-initial*** position is ***three***.
When a fourth consonant is present it is the ***result*** of ***inflection***, and it happens only in final clusters, not in initial position.
In order to ***create clusters***, certain ***rules*** have to be followed.
All consonants, with the exceptions of glottal fricative and approximant, are final consonants.
/s/ is the only pre-initial consonant, which can be followed only by 9 consonants: /p/ /t/ /k/ /f/ /m/ /n/ /l/ /w/.
The post initial consonants are all approximants.
Every plosive and fricative which can follow /s/ is voiceless like /s/.
Word ***final*** clusters can have a ***maximum*** of ***four*** consonants.