___
#### Key terms:
phonetics, phoneme, grapheme, phonology, allophones, stress, intonation, accent

___
#### Last week lesson recap

- english is weird /wiəd/
- english orthography /ɔːˈθɒɡrəfi/ is notoriously unreliable
- english is not a phonographic language
- for instance, wowel sound /i:/ can be spelt in numerous ways
- phonology, unlike phonetic, focuses in a particular language rather than sound production in general (phonemes)
- some sounds differences matter a great deal, whereas others are less important
- the ones that matter mostbare those that can change the meaning of otherwise identical words
- in english, the words *bit*, *bet*, *boat*, are distinguished by the wovels
- the words *bit*, *sit*, *wit*, are distinguished by the initial consonant
- the words *bit*, *bill*, *bin*, are distinguished by the final consonant
- so sound which change the meaning of words are called phonemes
- phonetics is the scientific study  that attemps to describe, transcribe and transcribe all possible sounds

___
#### The key 3 areas of phonology

- Articulation is the way sounds are made by the vocal organs
- Transmission is the physical property of sound as they travek from the tongue to thebear
- Reception is the way the ear and the brain receive the sound

___
#### Articulation of english sound: 

Standard British English Pronunciation
(RP - done last tuesday)
44 recognisable sounds
24 consonant sounds
20 wovel sounds

___
#### Why study phonetics and phonology?

Pronunciation is one aspect of language learning where transfer from L¹ can persist even in advanced students (L¹ interference).
Each L¹ brings its own "typical" pronunciation mistakes to English
This is known technically as using the wrong voice-settings.
Italian is a phonographic language, as graphic and phonems have no correlation.
English, unlike italian, is not a syllabic language.
So why study phonetics and phonology?
- of particular importance for learners of ESL because it has practical application
- English has a far larger repository of phonemes than languages like Standard italian
*Go*, *Though*, *Foe*, *Slow*, *Boat* = X-/əʊ/

___
#### Voice setting:

Those features of accent that result from the characteristic disposition and use of the articulatory organs by speakers of a specific language and which affecta the production of all the individual sounds common to that language.
It is quite easy to identify a speaker's L¹ thanks to the use of their L¹ voice settings when speaking english.
Using the wrong voice setting can sometimes lead to a breakdown in communication, or no communication at all.

___
#### Graphemes

A grapheme can have multiple phonemes.
Some letters may have multiple sounds, and some may represent no sound at all (silent).

***IPA*** (*international phonetic alphabet*) has graphemes which allows people to write the pronunciation of every word.

___
#### Sound of the words

Stress is the most predominant part of a word (dove sta l'accento) but it is not the accent. Accent is the pronunciation. Accent differs between regions, L¹, etc...
English is a stress-timed language. The intonation is given by the stress of the word.

___
#### Standard English, RP, dialects and spelling through history and regions.

The standard that is usually chosen and used in linguistic is the SBA

>this part of lesson was explained more in depth by teacher Pinnavaia.

Standard english is a dialect.
People have different accents, so only a few percentage uses standard english accent. (like italian dizione) (rp is spoken by around 3% of speakers)
R P is a social accent associated with the BBC, the public schools in england (public school does not mean scuola pubblica), and with members of upper-middle class.
RP is regionless.

83% of english words have predictable spelling, however, the remaining 17% is comprised of the most commonly used, everyday, words.
In english there is not enough wovel letters to represent wovel sounds
Engluah does not use accents, umlauts etc
English spelling reflects many archaic forms of pronunciation, like "night" that in the past  was pronounced with a fricative (like austrian nicht).

For example, The Canterbury Table (*can be found on MyAriel*) in ancient english does always rhyme, while in modern english it does not.
English spelling became fixed only in the 16ᵗʰ-17ᵗʰ century with the arrival of printing.
English as borrowed lots of words from other languages, trying to maintain the original pronunciation.

___
#### Phonetics

Phonetics is the physical realisation of the elements of the sound system, while phonology seala with the sound system of the languages.