___
#### Gerund vs Present Participle

Both gerund and present participle end in *-ing*, but they differ in behavior:
***Gerund*** can act as a ***subject*** or ***object***, so grammarly as a ***noun***. It can be substituted by a noun and, at least grammarly, the sentence would be correct.
***Present participle***, instead, can act as an ***adjective***. It can be transformed into a verb, from being an adjective, and, at least grammarly, the sentence would be correct.
For example, the sentence "*Jumping high, the boy caught the ball.*" can be changed into "*While jumping high, the boy caught the ball.*".

The ***infinitive*** can behave exactly as gerund does, and it is more formal.
For example: "*To tell a lie about something so important was wrong.*" is the same as “*Telling a lie about something so important was wrong.*".

___
#### Clauses vs Phrases vs Sentences

A ***clause*** is a group of words with a subject and a verb. *frase*
A ***sentence*** is a group of clauses. *periodo*
A ***phrase*** is a group of words acting as a single part of speech.
A ***nominal clause*** is a ***clause acting as a noun***, a ***nominal phrase*** is a ***phrase acting as a noun***.
Examples:
	In "*Luke is upset that he didn't pass the exam.*", *that he didn't pass the exam* is a nominal clause.
	In "*Lisa does not enjoy watching horror films.*", *watching* here is a nominal phrase. (*watching* here is a noun, so a gerund, not a verb)
	In "*It wasn't surprising that Tara came in the first place.*", *that Tara came in the first place* is the object, and a clause as it has a verb (*came*); also while *it wasn't surprising* may not be standalone by meaning, it does grammarly.

___
#### divisione in sillabe
in italiano, una vocale per sillaba (eccetto dittonghi etc come *glia* in *famiglia*)
in inglese in base a come si pronuncia, ad esempio *good* si pronuncia */gud/* e quindi è monosillabico.

*whoever subject whomever object* _nota_extra_